AFFP (also known as American Football Federation of the Philippines) is a non-profit organization in the Philippines founded on October 2011. Its first pioneering team member, Philippine Punishers, was composed of Filipinos, Fil-Americans, and expatriates.

History
The Philippine Punishers started with about 15 players headed by Coach Tim Beasley. After months of physically and mentally intensive practice, the team has grown to a strong 60 dedicated athletes eager to represent their country and their sport.
When the team was founded, the Philippine Punishers has played two home games against Guam All-Stars on April 2012 and defeating the Hong Kong Cobras finishing a score of 42-14 on 5 May of the same year in Clark, Pampanga. After winning the game against the Hong Kong Cobras, the Philippine Punishers once again won with their re-match on July 2012 ending a score of 32-12  The team also traveled to Beijing on August 2012 to slash the Beijing Guardians in a draw 14-0. The following months, Philippine Punishers enjoy a 13-6  victory over Sharks Saipan in Manila.
On 2013, the AFFP produced the Philippine Valkyries, its first Philippine women’s tackle football, started only by five players who have a passion in American Football. The team is now composed of 30 members committed to spread the sport among the ladies.

Philippine Punishers
Philippine Punishers is composed of Filipinos, Americans, Australians, Chinese and Canadians whose age ranges from 18-43. Despite the misconception that American Football is only for big people, there are players as small as 4'11" up to 6'7" with the biggest Filipino player being 6'1 and 365 lbs.
The team was created to introduce and popularize American Football in the Philippines where the sport is not yet familiar and to be The played at the local and international levels. It was built simply by word of mouth among those expressing interest in learning how to play American Football.
The Philippine Punishers came into international scene in Asia in a big way by playing against established organizations such as the Beijing Guardians, Hong Kong Cobras (twice), Guam All-Stars and Saipan Sharks. They had a very successful year by posting a 4-1 win/loss record even though 85% of the Filipino players have less than 1 year of playing experience.

Philippine Valkyries
The Philippine Valkyries were the first Women’s American Football Team established in the Philippines. It is a full-contact American Football team member of American Football Federation of the Philippines, also known as AFFP.
Founded in 2013, Coach Tim Beasley, AFFP Director, started an American Football clinic held in ASCOM and exclusive for female ranging from 19 years old and above. The Philippine Valkyries were the first to put their hand up to take on the challenge of establishing the women’s gridiron team in Manila. In January 2014, the Philippine Valkyries competed against Guam Gridiron Divas in Quezon City. 	
The team is committed to bring American Football to all ages within the sporting community. Philippine Valkyries are composed of exceptional women from around the community that have full-time jobs and are winners on and off the field.


== References ==