Karwan is a major suburb in Hyderabad, Telangana, India. It is a part of the old city of Hyderabad.It is 10 km from the IT hubs like Gachibowli, HITECH City, etc. It had major importance in the trade which happened during the reign of Qutb Shahis.

Culture
Karwan has a mixed population of both Hindus and Muslims. The festival of Bonalu is very famous here and is celebrated in grandeur. The main worship during Bonalu happens at the Darbar Maisamma temple. The celebrations start a week before and on a penultimate day, the thotella is installed in front of Maisamma temple. On the last day many cultural programs take place, along with the distribution of prizes to the meritorious students from UG to PG. The festival culminates with numerous palaharam carts which display various traditions and the removal of thotella along with the procession.
Karwan has very long history dating back to the Nizam rule it was a well known diamond pearls market, even till today there are old buildings and other old temples and masjids constructed during Nizam period.
Andaroon or Inside karwan has few old buildings and was the place of the old pearl and diamond market existed.  It is also famous for handloom clothes.
Shree Vithalnathji Temple & shree Santhoshi matha temple along with Lord Narsimha swamy temple and Kesari Hanuman temple at (Jiyaguda) are very famous and old temples which are well known in the area.
There is also an old temple named Ranganathswamy temple which was also expected to be built during Nizam period. It is a famous temple in twin cities and famous for Vaikunta Ekadashi celebrations in Jiyaguda. In earlier days it was known as Jiyargudem, which is under Karwan constituency.

Neighborhoods
Jiyaguda
Purana Pool
Begum Bazar
Attapur

Professional services
Internet Marketing Consultant - Bharath Bhushan
Mee Seva
Jyothi Communications

Commercial area
The Mehdipatnam Rythu Bazaar and Gudimalkapur vegetable market are close to Karwan. There are many convention centres and big function halls on Karwan road, including:

The Vintage Palace
Crown Function Hall
Mahaboob Pride Palace
KS Palace
SBA Garden - Jiyaguda Road
Grand Garden Hall
SDA Palace

Theaters
S V C Eeshwar
Asian Cinemas M Cube
Cinepolis
ALankar Cinemas - Langar House

Schools
There are schools which cater to all budgets, such as: 

Bharathi High School,
Vivekananda High School,
St. Mary's High School,
D'Drop High School.
MESCO College in Mustaidpura,
Sri Gayatri e-Techno School,
Newgen School of Excellence
Kakatiya Vidyaniketan School
Sri Saraswathi Shishu Mandir High SchoolThere are also government-run schools such as Govt. High School Mustaidpura, Govt. High School Kulsumpura, and Bharath Abyudaya High School, the last of which is one of the biggest government schools in Telangana.

Banks
There are many banks in the area, including:

Andhra Bank
Vijaya Bank
State Bank of Hyderabad
State Bank of India

Transport
There are many buses that connect to different parts of the city like CBS, Golconda, Secunderabad by TSRTC. This area is close to Mehdipatnam Bus Depot. The Karwan/Jiyaguda Bus Stand, near Kesari Hanuman Temple, serves routes (2J/86J/1J/72J/80S) to as far as Secunderabad and L.B.Nagar passing through Afzalgunj.
There is another station in an area called Tallagadda, with buses to Secunderabad (49T, 5K, 16/5K/T) and Ramnagar (6T)
There is no close MMTS Train station near Karwan, but Nampally Railway Station is very near to the Karwan (approximately 5 km).


== References ==